# 4-Bit ALU

I built a 4-bit ALU using the Hardware Description Language (HDL) Verilog. This ALU has a 2-bit opcode that creates 4 selectable options: Add, Subtract, logical AND, and logical OR. The Add and Subtract methods utilize twos complement digital logic.

The same ALU was constructed in 2 different ways. One way utilizes cases to create a 1-bit ALU that was scaled up to a 4-bit ALU utilizing instances of the 1-but ALU. The other method follows the general structure of an ALU that uses hardware such as full adders and mux (multiplexers).

Both ALUs are encapuslated such that they use the same method names, so to the user calling either version should appear to be the exact same even though they functionally each work differently in each file (the cases method versus the structural method). As a result, there is only 1 testbench file to conduct design verification for this ALU that should be applicable to either alu design file. I used EDAPlayground to code both my design and testbench (like an IDE).

This project was simulated in EDA Playground to ensure that both methodologies for creating this 4-bit ALU worked perfectly and achieved 100% design verification. They were also simulated in the same software using the commercial software Synopsys VCS 2023.03, which showed that the CPU time for the structural ran in 0.43 s versus the behavorial running in 0.46 s. While this is usually considered an insignificant difference, it is important to note that this still shows around a 6.74% decrease in CPU time for the structural case.

Creating this was inspried by a course I took last semester during my sophomore spring (Spring 2025: ECE 2123L: Digital Systems Laboratory). In the lecture, I learned basic HDL and Verilog skills and applied some of it in the laboratory, but I did not have as confident of a grasp of the language as I would have liked to complete more advanced projects on my own, so I utilized hdlbits.com to learn Verilog as shown in a different GitHub repo and made this project as an introduction for me to create more advanced projects in the future and showcase my growth in skill through learning this language as a student interested in circuit design and design verification to create electronics.
